Intro:

When you work closely with a group of people, you get to know their strengths and weaknesses and how those traits contribute to the overall success of your business. While you may dread the idea of providing feedback to a colleague who doesn't report to you, try to think of it more as an opportunity. Not only do you get to tell them how they can improve, but you also get the chance to hear how they see themselves fitting into the company and the personal circumstances that may be contributing to their performance. On top of that, you may even gain some valuable information about your own performance that could further contribute to the overall improvement of the company.

Step 1
Ask before giving someone feedback. If they want to hear your input, first ask the person how he sees his role in the business and how he thinks he is faring, advises the Inc.com. Asking questions first and understanding how he views his position can help you provide more insightful feedback.

Step 2
Balance the positive with the negative. People want to know what they're doing right as much as what they're doing wrong. Even if you have a laundry list of issues that need to be discussed, start on a positive note to stimulate the reward centers in his brain, advises Entreprenuer.com. Before your discussion, make a list of positive as well as negative aspects of his performance, so that you'll have plenty of examples to draw from when you're talking.

Step 3
Provide specific ways to improve each issue. Provide examples of what you've done to deal with similar situations. Since you're talking with a co-worker or colleague who may have a similar position and similar duties as yours, it may be easier for you to provide these suggestions than it would be if you were a boss providing feedback to a subordinate.

Step 4
Talk about issues right away, advises the University of Maryland human resources department. If you don't bring up issues soon after they happen, you may forget specifics, or the person may not remember the issue at all. Set up a regular lunch meeting or coffee time to talk with your colleague so that you don't have to wait for a more formal review time to discuss things that could be improved.

Step 5
Accept advice and feedback to keep the conversation going both ways. Asking your colleague to advise you about improving your performance levels the playing field and can help avoid the feeling that one person is superior to the other.



Michael Auzenne and Mark Horstman have a refreshing take on feedback, “Given that there are at least 100 things done correctly for each mistake made, we should be giving out 100 positive feedback statements to one negative feedback.”  Unfortunately, it rarely works that way.

The fact that we do not give nearly enough positive feedback is because we usually associate “feedback” with “negative,” which evokes an expectation of “conflict.”  At its core, the fear of conflict weakens our will to give feedback. 

In addition to a lack of will, however, is a lack of skill.  The way people give feedback, especially negative feedback, can actually cause the conflict we want to avoid.  Too often, our focus is on a characterization or attitude, such as “You are angry,” “You don’t respect my work,” “You are so self-righteous.”  The problem is that if it is not a behavior that can be easily observed, you are bound to cause a defensive reaction. 

Framing the feedback is pretty easy.  “When you do that behavior, this impact happens.”  But there is one more critical point-how it sounds.  If you take a casual, peer to peer tone, your feedback will be a piece of input you are giving to the other person.  Relax, ease up, give it as a friend and it will be received as such.  In Michael Auzenne’s words, “Feedback is not judgment, it is only insight.”

This is what some positive and negative feedback statements look like.

“When you do such detailed data analysis … it makes me really glad we’re co-authoring this paper together.”
“When you report back to the department about your University service, it helps me understand that committee’s work and also your valuable input. Thanks for being on the committee.”

“When you come late to meetings … it throws things off and we get behind”

“When you tell me you’ll have the lecture done and don’t follow through … I can’t finish preparing the exercises and our class doesn’t flow for the students”




Feedback is least useful when it is:

Inaccurate or untrue: if the feedback recipient doubts the accuracy of the feedback, it is unlikely he or she will be able to learn from it

Biased due to favoritism or politics: although nothing in human affairs in general or the workplace in particular is ever "objective", the more the feedback can stand on its own rather than being seen as part of some personal or political agenda, the better.

Insensitive and unduly critical: this kind of feedback is unlikely to be "heard"- the recipient will be too upset to process what you are saying

Not specific or actionable: anything vague or out of the person's control is not going to help him or her do anything differently

Constituted by orders or ultimatums: this kind of feedback is likely to raise hackles rather than willingness or ability to improve.

Feedback is most useful when it is:

Candid and honest: this kind of feedback is credible and although it can be painful, is your best bet for helping the person get his or her game up

Specific and actionable: the more behaviorally-based the feedback is, rather than character-based, the more able the recipient will be to implement what you suggest

Based on more than one incident or example: without trying to "build a case", it is still helpful to bring multiple examples into your feedback so that the person can see patterns as they appear to others

Based on more than one person's view: this can be tricky- on one hand, if multiple people share a perception, it is likely to be more valid and credible. At the same time, you don't want the person to whom you're giving feedback to feel ganged up on

Framed positively and constructively: this is the opposite of being unduly critical- people are more likely to hear and act on feedback if you use a "carrot" rather than a "stick" in describing to them the potential benefits of doing something better or differently

Summarized and integrated into key themes: it is helpful to provide some thematic linkages between feedback in order to give the person a big picture view and then also provide detailed feedback in that larger context


Bad Feedback --
-- Demotivates, focuses on blame; creates defensiveness and confrontation
-- Problem-oriented; does not improve skill
-- Undermines confidence and self-esteem
-- Leaves person guessing
-- Leaves person feeling 'judged'

Good Feedback
-- Encourages, focuses on improvements – achieved or possible; creates trust and cooperation
-- Solution-oriented; improves skills
-- Increases confidence in ability and potential
-- Clarifies the current position and what to do next
-- Leaves person feeling 'helped' and inspired



Do's and don'ts of negative feedback
√ DON’T sugarcoat negative feedback. If you’re going to use constructive criticism, don’t dilute the impact.

√ DO focus on specific events.

√ DON’T give criticism in a way that would offend. Avoid sarcasm and personal asides.

√ DO make change the goal of your feedback.

√ DON’T put employees on the defensive.

√ DO solicit input by asking questions such as: “Do you feel that ...,” “How would you recommend that ...,” and “How did you happen to ....”

√ DO postpone criticizing if your temper is at the breaking point. Take time to cool off.

√ DO develop a reputation for being even-keeled. If employees fear you or find your personality to be unpredictable, they will close themselves off to any of your feedback.

√ DON’T get into the habit of using words such as “always” and “never” when giving performance feedback. Odds are, you only mean “sometimes.” For example, when reprimanding an employee for being late three days in a row, don’t say, “You’re always late.” Better: Give specific dates and times.

√ DO provide negative feedback regularly and when appropriate. The element of surprise is not a “plus” in negative situations.



Examples of effective coworker comments

You are driven and motivated in your work. You are very clear about whatyou own within the department. It would benefit the entire department if youpaid more attention to the delivery and tone of some of your comments.Assigning a duty or responsibility sometimes comes across as a harshdirective instead of a transition of duties or responsibilities.

Whenoffering feedback after being presented with a new idea, it would be helpfulif you recognized the possibility of a new process before immediatelynegating the idea. For example, when it was suggested that we rebuild thefield templates for ProjX, you immediately resisted because of the timeinvolved in implementation without considering the benefits of the change.

You are a great asset to the team. You are very professional and focusedon your work. Despite the difficult deadlines for the ProjX implementation,you maintain a positive attitude. You respond to problems without gettingangry or frustrated. You often stay late working and are very conscientiousof timelines and resources. Your most outstanding "value" fromwhat I have seen is your attitude towards continuous improvement. Wheneveryou have free time I see you studying VBA or looking over someone's shouldertrying to troubleshoot a problem.

You seem to have lost your focus, which is essential to being successfulon ProjX. This is evident in that you have signed your initials to checklistitems without fully performing the checks for the project, which resulted inpoor quality and client questions.

You seem to take constructive criticismas a personal attack, rather than assistance from people who are trying tohelp. Your attitude over the past quarter, though it has improved somewhatrecently, has been harmful to your relationship with your co-workers andyour work quality because people on your team to not feel comfortablecommunicating with you. You have the ability to do your job extremely well,but haven't taken the initiative to do so.

You have worked very hard to improve your technical skills by increasingyour work with the ProjX field and verification templates and the data modeldocumentation. You continuously work on improving your relationship with theclient and your co-workers, you try very hard to resolve inter-officeproblems quietly and maturely.

My only criticism is that you tend to justask for solutions to problems without completely understanding what theproblem is -- for example, the rounding problem on the field template from lastweek. Upon understanding the issue you usually can arrive at the solution.

You clearly have the desire to run projects but you have to be willing toput in the time on the details and become more thorough before you will havethe ability to do so. Areas to improve: attention to detail, ability tocommunicate plan concepts and system specifics quickly and clearly,Integrator, timeliness.

You do what is necessary to make the client happy and are willing to workextra if things are behind. You have an excellent knowledge of the softwaretools and understand how your projects work. You could focus more ontraining your coworkers, which would benefit them and ease your burden. Youhave a lot to offer, don't keep it to yourself. Good client managementskills and client focus. You are a lot of fun to work with.

Your job skills and initiative are very good. You are always willing tohelp others solve problems even if it inconveniences you and you are verywilling to work above and beyond the call of duty.

One thing to possiblyimprove is your skills in managing others and in training others in yourgroup about their projects. You have an intimate knowledge of your projectsand since you designed them, sometimes you take for granted that others onthe team may have more knowledge than they actually possess.

Sometimes whenfixing a problem, you do not readily explain how you are fixing it becauseyou often work quickly. This is fine for solving problems, but if youexplained the issues a little more clearly, it could be of great service toyour team members.



bad feedback-->
“I came up with a new rating scale for staff performance reviews – “YS” – which stands for “You Stink!” 
… Now there’s a boss who focuses on strengths!

“You should wear heels to work.”
… A lawsuit waiting to happen.

“That’s a fantastic idea! I hope you understand when I present it as my own.” 
…She wasn’t kidding.

“I get upset when you’re incompetent.”
…Not sure that’s what the professionals mean when they suggest leading with “I” statements.

“He would argue with a signpost.”

“It’s hard to believe that he beat 1,000,000 other sperm to the egg.”

“Works well when under constant supervision and cornered like a rat in a trap.”

“Since my last report, this employee has reached rock bottom…..and has started to dig.”

“He sets low personal standards and then consistently fails to achieve them.”

“This young lady has delusions of adequacy.”
